---
layout: post
title: Readings
date: '2020-01-02'
intro_paragraph: Here are some books I have read recently!
---
'Narconomics: How To Run a Drug Cartel' by Tom Wainwright

I certainly got some weird looks from my father when he opened the Amazon parcel containing this book therein. However, Narconomics was a real eye-opener for what goes into maintaining drug cartels, particularly with the level of violence and extortion employed in Central and South America. What Wainwright presents really well is a compelling case for an alternative means of deterring users from drugs. Rather than telling them that the drugs are bad for thems, it would probably be emotionally compelling if they knew the suffering that likely went into getting the drugs to them. After all, more people who have died making drugs than taking drugs. However, the book is primarily one on economics rather than moral quandaries. By applying the principles in economics to the drugs trade, such as supply and demand, diversification and offshoring, it illustrates how even the shadiest and most deplorable ways of making money can still be examined as any other business. It’s this perspective that has been lacking in the current ‘war’ on drugs. For instance, current efforts seem to target the supply of drugs, with limited understanding on how the value of drugs leaps after each successive stage in the supply chain. It would be far more effective to target the demand for drugs. Targeting supply increases prices, but demand for drugs remains constant and hence inadvertently increases the value of market. All this does is put more money in the caters’ pockets. The book discusses how legalisation can take the sting out of the black market, as well as curbing the risks of hastily made ‘legal highs’ that may end up doing more damage to drugtakers than their illegal counterparts. The field reporting that Wainwright undertakes is extremely brave and fascinating, as he examines the various personalities involved in the trade. He also combines his primary research with a lot of well-researched literature. One particularly has to feel sorry for the farmers. A fantastic insight the book demonstrates is how governments search for and destroy coca crops, but this does not affect the price of drugs because its the farmers that absorbs this cost rather than the cartels. Its an even sadder state of affairs when the farmers are extorted and threatened along with their family to keep them in line. Meanwhile, the governments of these countries do not do enough to empower these farmers to grow more desirable crops. The corporate social responsibility angle that Wainwright discusses is particularly fascinating, with cartels using their revenue to build schools and churches to curry favour with locals while the corrupt police forces only undermine the support for the government. Wainwright presents his case in understandable terms for anyone to read and uses economic theory to illustrate how the inner machinations of drug cartels can be beaten with the right kinds of policies and governmental action. Deeply interesting and disturbing in equal measures. 

'Heteromation, and Other Stories of Computing and Capitalism' by Hamid R. Ekbia and Bonnie A. Nardi

The concept of Heteromation presented in this book by Ekbia and Nardi is significant. The aim is to define and put a name to a phenomenon that plays an increasing role in the success of many technology companies and the creation of new economic models. This idea is that labour is distributed via a network so workers within that network can perform tasks to generate value for both themselves and the company managing the network. The obvious examples are companies like Uber that are part of nascent ‘gig economies’ that stretches the meaning of being an employee. One mark I would pose against the book is that the term ‘labour’, drawing from the roots of Marxism, assumes a rather vague definition that feels almost moulded to fit certain topics into the book. For example, tasks such as Facebook users clicking ‘like’ on posts generates a lot of useful data for companies, but this feels like a very different scenario than creating paid jobs in the same way that Uber does. These are more like ‘microinteractions’ that create business value but not direct revenue (and certainly no pay for the users). This feels like a different phenomenon, as it merely is serving the users of a service by evolving content to their needs. These are both different concepts still to citizen science and crowdsourcing of work, such as on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. This exists in a halfway house between the previous two examples, because the ‘work’ performed by members of the network is more substantial than that of Facebook users, but is rarely utilised as a sole source of income (though there are examples of full-time Turkers, the primary use case of the platform is not to create jobs in the same way that Uber does). Hence, the definition of work gets a bit muddy in the book. However, it does raise important questions to be solved. How do we define the relationship between members of the network and the creators? Many economic theories have been applied to reason about heteromation, such as stakeholder theory. Distributing work can be done in smart ways, such as with the Captcha project, where the distribution of work is less visible behind another more primary usage. But is it ethical to distribute work in a manner that exploits underpaid or unpaid workers and merely saves the company money? Certainly, people should be aware what they put their effort into and there’s no doubt work will be transformed by networks for years to come.

'Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life' by Peter Godfrey-Smith

Boasting an eye-catching cover, Other Minds examines the octopus alongside other marine life such as the cuttlefish. However, this is not just a nature book with pretty pictures. Godfrey-Smith presents a curious mix of evolutionary biology and philosophy to discuss the very meaning of consciousness and of intelligence. What is made clear from the start is that the octopus and us Homo Sapiens end up on opposite sides of an evolutionary tree. Our common ancestor dates back much farther than between humans and primates. But despite this gulf of evolution, intelligence evolves separately in both branches of the tree. Other Minds demonstrates the different capabilities of octopuses to try and trace when and why they evolved. For example, their evolution removed the shell that protected them from predators. Their lifespan tends to only be around 3 years, but their brains have half a million neurons. This feels almost like a shame that such a clever organism has such a short life. However, the fact that nerve cells on their tentacles could literally give them a ‘life of their own’ is especially fascinating. Godfrey-Smith talks about their ability to change colour, to spout ink and the tactics they use to fight off predators, but does so in order to discuss their implications for the octopus’s sense of consciousness. Because intelligence came abotu at distant points in the evolutionary tree, he posits a new way of thinking of consciousness by seeing it as adaptation to surroundings that does not just exist in humans. To do this, he even traces evolution all the way back to single-celled organisms and demonstrates why they even needed to clump together and start moving around in the first place. He even draws upon first-hand experiences observing a group of octopuses off the coast of Australia, including a memorable passage where he watched dramatic final moments of one creature’s life. The book is a perfect length, packed with a lot to learn and think about but with nothing that feels out of place. It makes you even question whether the methods we use to measure intelligence now are sufficient when other animals exhibit it in very different ways. Even for those not enthused about biology, this is a recommended read.

'The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World' by Pedro Domingos

The Master Algorithm is the lofty goal of the field of machine learning. We currently have algorithms that learn what sort of movies to recommend to you and how to win at a game of Go, both by learning from a vast amount of input data. The idea behind the Master Algorithm is that it would be able to learn to optimise for any problem and dataset that we throw at it. Domingos presents the potential benefits of this, as we could one day have the ability to solve problems that currently seem too difficult, such as identifying genetic precursors to cancer. However, unlike a lot of currently popular computer science books, do not go looking for a book on the social implications of AI methods or on its potential applications for the future. The primary strength of Domingos’s book is as a technical introduction to the different methods for machine learning. He discusses support inverse deduction, genetic programming, support vector machines, backpropagation and probabilistic inference. He touches on the basic theories that drive gradient descent, Bayesian statistics, neural networks and Markov chains just to name a few concepts. The book does not get too mathematical in its explanations but instead makes use of a lot of analogies to educate readers of the different subgroups within Machine Learning. While the book is not technical, it serves as a great introduction to the field, written with real passion. Understanding each of these ‘tribes’ in machine learning is important for when Domingos combines the understanding of each together in order to put forward what he thinks the Master Algorithm will be (by combining ideas from each). This is especially clever given that Domingos details limitations with each existing approach, such as what happens when the algorithm has incomplete data or gets stuck in a local maximum/minimum. There are other books that are more detailed on the social questions that machine learning and other AI approaches bring, but this book serves best as an introduction to the different schools of thought of machine learning and thus shining a light on what goes on in the algorithms that power our everyday lives. It’s actually rather inspiring in making you want to study further, especially with the point that the book raises early on that you do not need to know mathematics or programming to be able to design algorithms. 

The Wizard and the Prophet: Two Groundbreaking Scientists and Their Conflicting Visions of the Future of Our Planet by Charles C. Mann

This book is so, so clever. It might be the one I recommend the most out of this list, even though it is like choosing between apples and oranges. The premise of Mann’s book is simple: by extrapolating the current population growth, it is estimated that the global population will reach 10 billion by the year 2050. How then do intend to feed all these people? The eponymous Wizard and Prophet are, respectively, Norman Borlaug and William Vogt. They are both relatively seldom known scientists who held competing views of the planet’s future to feed its population. Borlaug believed that innovation and science could humankind to overcome any challenge that the environment presents. Vogt believed that the planet had a finite limit on the number of people that it could support and that continuing to grow our population is foolish and even downright reprehensible. The book talks about both of their personal histories in a manner that makes complete sense for informing their beliefs later in their lives. Mann is an outstanding storyteller, who brings both of these scientists to live vividly. When it then comes to the book discussing concepts in ecology, chemistry, geology or botany, Mann always introduces them at precisely the right time with just the right detail. His work here is something of a tour de force, covering many of the problems that face our planet and how these two diametrically opposite scientists would approach them. Mann discusses climate change, the availability of water, the quality of soil and renewable energy sources in order to present two nuanced schools of thought for dealing with these problems. He does extremely well to remain impartial and instead highlights the benefits and drawbacks with each of the two scientists’ views, as well as why it is difficult to simply listen to both of them. Through the way he structures his book, he also demonstrates the benefits of seeing both sides of an argument in that one can help to explain the limitations of the other. Borlaug and Vogt are two individuals I had not heard of (although the former did win the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on maximising yield using fertilisers and irrigation), but they are presented here with such verve that it’s a wonder why. Mann also draw upon a lot of adjacent research to show researchers with similar views to the pair, such as Malthusian thinking on carrying capacity and the monumental Haber process for producing ammonia for fertiliser. Mann covers a lot of scientific grounds while seeming to humanise two scientists who wanted what was best for our planet. This was a really captivating book and I would recommend it wholeheartedly.
