---
layout: post
title: 'Nudge: A Critical Look'
date: '2020-01-02'
intro_paragraph: >-
  'Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness' by Richard
  Thaler and Cass Sunstein
---
When I visit a supermarket, I always notice that chocolates are placed right next to the checkouts. Right near the end of your customer journey, where you less likely to put conscious thought into your decisions, the shop wants to tempt to have that Galaxy bar. Nudge looks at the concepts of choice architecture, which no doubt serves a part of our everyday lives without us noticing. The aforementioned example is sneaky for sure, but it essentially shows that by the ways in which choices are presented, the designers of those choices are trying to achieve some aim. In this case, the individuals decided to maximise profits rather than perhaps encouraging a healthier lifestyle for their customers. Thaler and Sunstein talk extensively about their vision of ‘libertarian paternalism’. This is where decisions can be presented in a way that can nudge them in a beneficial direction rather than forcing people to do something, which would be more unethical. The range of use cases for the concepts brought forward in the book is extensive. From health care to pensions, the principles presented here would actually be beneficial for me when working on design research. Should users be opted into a particular scheme by default? The authors understandably relate the ideas of nudges to the two ‘systems’ of thinking presented by Kahneman in his seminal work ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow’. They also go through a series of cognitive biases that are very important to consider when designing anything that allows users to make decisions. For instance, the status quo bias means that people really have to nudged to change their current course of action. Although, the book does downplay perhaps making the design of choices more of a ‘push’ in certain scenarios. As designers, you may find yourself with the power to subtlety instil positive habits into users by presenting decisions in a way that implicitly suggests the preferred course of action. This is how design can make a statement of intent. For this book, I would say the examples detailed can become a bit repetitive to read, but I would say the early sections are worth reading to learn the foundational concepts.
